---
title: "Simple Debugging Overview"
tags: [Debugging, Visual Studio, C#]
---

Reading code is a key skill you need to be an effective developer. Many courses teach you how to write code or code to a particular paradigm. Understanding the tools that help you walk through code makes understanding the tricky sections of a codebase or a pesky bug a manageable problem. You will not be lucky and have come across code that is well documented and has proper variable names, methods that do only one thing and the entire application follows the architectural principles to the letter.
Fortunately, some common debugging tools can help us manage our codebase. We will go over some of the common visual studio debugging options. Many IDE’s have taken on the task of making debugging easier. You can typically count on a terminal debugger to exist it would be more common to use the debugger in your primary IDE.
We will use visual studio to go over concepts in our debugging example. The concept covered in this article is a breakpoint. Breakpoints are pretty straight forward. Where you place the breakpoint is where the executing code will stop till you select the next step. The key to a breakpoint is placing it in the execution flow of the program. When he breakpoint is hit you can see the value of the object or primitive type it is set to.
There are other options at a breakpoint, mainly step over, step into and continue. You can walk a program by just stepping over each line seeing what the current value is. Step into will take you a level deeper if there is a level. If there is a function call you can go inside of the method. The continue button will just resume the program.
The run to click option will let you set a “temporary breakpoint” to the point that you select, there is a button that should appear over unmanned code. There are settings to allow you to work with managed code. This option is best used for visible code on your screen.
The immediate window described by its documentation is used for debugging and evaluate expressions, execute statements, and print variable values. The Immediate window evaluates expressions by building and using the currently selected project. I have used this in conjunction with breakpoints. To get a convenient place to see the variables in my current scope, I can even run the methods of current objects and trigger other processes. This is a great tool for people who write little sections of test code to see what happens at that point. There are limitations to the immediate window, you will not be able to declare a class and then run it.
There are many tools in visual studio and other ideas that aid in the debugging process. Many of the tools I know about where handed down to me from senior devlopers, but there is documentation out there for those people with discipline.